The retain cycle of Swift async/await (#41)
Zuehlke/software-engineering-corner: drafts/swift-async-await-cycle.md

---
title: The retain cycle of Swift async/await
subtitle: How to inadvertently extend object lifetime
domain: software-engineering-corner.hashnode.dev
tags: swift, swift-concurrency, ios, macos, watchos, tvos, visionos, apple, vapor, bluetooth, concurrency, asynchronous, async, await, async-await, developer, learning, software-development, programming-tips, software-engineering, code, coding
cover: https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1724686396858/4k_l7bLPj.jpg?auto=format
publishAs: simonseyer
hideFromHashnodeCommunity: false
saveAsDraft: true
--- 
In a recent project, we observed one of those bugs that lets every developer jubilate. It was only happening rarely and seemed to manifest in varying ways. 

> But first some context: We were running a Swift/Vapor server which controls a generic Zühlke Bluetooth emulation dongle (connected via USB) in order to emulate medical devices. This talks to an iOS app via Bluetooth (running on a real phone) that is under test by a custom (medical) XCTest-based test framework. In summary, quite some moving parts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But first, some context: We were running a Swift/Vapor server which controls a generic Zühlke Bluetooth emulation dongle (connected via USB) in order to emulate medical devices. This talks to an iOS app via Bluetooth (running on a real phone) that is under test by a custom (medical) XCTest-based test framework. In summary, quite some moving parts.
```

![Real project setup](https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1724685658047/IBP4odcIg.png?auto=format)

> When executing tests in sequence (i.e. not individually), they would sometimes fail because of a communication failure. Curiously, most messages were still transmitted successfully. After some digging, we realised that on failure, the tests that executed *before* had one thing in common: they terminated the connection forcefully. This was fine by itself but led us to think that somehow the tests were not executed in isolation.

Reviewer: Perhaps clarify what kind of communication failure it is to ensure the context is clear?
When executing tests in sequence (i.e. not individually), they would sometimes fail because of a **Bluetooth** communication failure. Curiously, most messages were still transmitted successfully.

Here’s the code, still resulting in the same output as in solution #1:
```swift
class MessageLayer {
    private var task: Task<Void, Never>? // private now

    init() {
        task = Task { // Be careful to not capture self here strongly
            try? await Self.sendMessages(2) // Self instead of self
        }
    }

    private static func sendMessages(_ messages: Int) async throws { // static
        for i in 1...messages {
            print("Sending: \(i)")
            try await Task.sleep(for: .seconds(0.5))
        }
    }

    deinit {
        print("Deinit")
        task?.cancel()
    }
}

var messageLayer: MessageLayer? = MessageLayer()
messageLayer = nil
print("End of test")
```

The nice thing is that the background task management is completely self contained and consumers of the `MessageLayer` can just use it without a second thought.

## Wrap Up
As you can see, it is quite simple to inadvertently extend the lifetime of objects with long-running async functions. We implemented solution #2 to solve our issue successfully. 

> We hope we saved you some hours of debugging and you enjoyed diving into this issue as much as we did. If you can avoid spawning a new `Task` all together, you never run into this problem. That’s obviously preferred. However, in case you cannot get around it, you now have a solution at hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope we saved you some hours of debugging and that you enjoyed diving into this issue as much as we did. If you can avoid spawning a new `Task` altogether, you never run into this problem. That’s obviously preferred. However, in case you cannot get around it, you now have a solution at hand.
```
